Books By YAHWEH's Sword
PDF Book 2 Of BARUCH
Chapters 1 through 87
    1

 2 BARUCH 1
Yerusalem will be destroyed
2 BARUCH 1:1
And it happened in the twenty-fifth year of YeconiYah (Jeconiah), the king of Yahudah, that the Word of YAHWEH came to Baruch, the son of Neriah,
2 BARUCH 1:2
And said to him: Have you seen all that this people are doing to ME, the evil things which the two tribes which remained have done more than the ten tribes which were carried away into captivity?
2 BARUCH 1:3
For the former tribes were forced by their kings to sin, but these two have themselves forced and compelled their kings to sin.
2 BARUCH 1:4
Behold, therefore, I shall bring evil upon this city and its inhabitants. And it will be taken away from before MY presence for a time. And I shall scatter this people among the nations that they may be beneficial to the nations.
2 BARUCH 1:5
And MY people will be chastened, and the time will come that they will look for that which can make their times prosperous.
2 BARUCH 2
2 BARUCH 2:1
This, then, I have said to you that you may say to YermeYah(Jeremiah) and all those who are like you that you may retire from this city. For your works are for this city like a firm pillar and your prayers like a strong wall.
2 BARUCH 3
2 BARUCH 3:1
And I said:
2 BARUCH 3:2
O YAHWEH, Sovereign Master, have I therefore come into the world to see the evil things of my mother?
2 BARUCH 3:3
No, Sovereign Master. If I have found free unmerited favor and pardon in YOUR eyes, take away my ruach first that I may go to my fathers and I may not see the destruction of my mother.
2 BARUCH 3:4
For from two sides I am hard pressed: I cannot resist YOU, but my soul also cannot behold the evil of my mother. But one thing I shall say in YOUR presence, O YAHWEH: Now, what will happen after these things?
2

2 BARUCH 3:5
For if YOU destroy YOUR city and deliver up YOUR country to those who hate us, how will the name of Yisrael be remembered again?
2 BARUCH 3:6
Or how shall we speak again about YOUR splendid deeds? Or to whom again will that which is in YOUR Torah be explained?
2 BARUCH 3:7
Or will the universe return to its nature and the world go back to its original silence?
2 BARUCH 3:8
And will the multitude of the souls be taken away and will not the nature of man be mentioned again?
2 BARUCH 3:9
And where is all that which YOU said to Mosheh about us?
2 BARUCH 4
The New Yerusalem
2 BARUCH 4:1
And YAHWEH said to me:
This city will be delivered up for a time,
And the people will be chastened for a time, And the world will not be forgotten.
2 BARUCH 4:2
Or do you think that this is the city of which I said: On the palms of MY hands I have carved you?
2 BARUCH 4:3
It is not this building that is in your midst now; it is that which will be revealed, with ME, that was already prepared from the moment that I decided to create Paradise. And I showed it to Adam before he sinned. But when he transgressed the commandment, it was taken away from him - as also Paradise.
2 BARUCH 4:4
After these things I showed it to MY servant Abraham in the night between the portions of the victims.
2 BARUCH 4:5
And again I showed it also to Mosheh on Mount Sinai when I showed him the likeness of the tabernacle and all its vessels.
2 BARUCH 4:6
Behold, now it is preserved with ME - as also Kingdom Paradise.
2 BARUCH 4:7
Now go away and do as I command you.
3

 2 BARUCH 5
Preparation made by the malakim before the enemies arrive
2 BARUCH 5:1
And I answered and said:
So then I shall be guilty in Zion,
that YOUR haters will come to this place and pollute YOUR sanctuary, and carry off YOUR heritage into captivity,
and rule over them whom YOU love.
And then they will go away again to the land of their idols,
and boast before them.
And what have YOU done to YOUR great NAME?
2 BARUCH 5:2
And YAHWEH said to me:
MY NAME and MY splendor shall last unto eternity.
MY judgment, however, shall assert its rights in its own time.
2 BARUCH 5:3
And you shall see with your eyes that the enemy shall not destroy Zion and burn Yerusalem, but that they shall serve the Judge for a time.
2 BARUCH 5:4
You, however, go away and do all which I have said to you.
2 BARUCH 5:5
And I went away and took with me YermeYah and Adu and SeraiYah and Jabish and GedaliYah and all the nobles of the people. And I brought them to the valley of Kidron and told them all which had been said to me.
2 BARUCH 5:6
And they raised their voices and they all lamented.
2 BARUCH 5:7
And we sat there and fasted until the evening.
2 BARUCH 6
2 BARUCH 6:1
Now it happened on the following day that, behold, an army of the Chaldeans surrounded the city. And in the evening I, Baruch, left the people, went outside, and set myself by an oak.
2 BARUCH 6:2
And I was grieving over Zion and sighed because of the captivity which had come upon the people.
2 BARUCH 6:3
And behold, suddenly a strong ruach lifted me and carried me above the wall of Yerusalem.
2 BARUCH 6:4
And I saw, and behold, there were standing four malakim at the four comers of the city, each of them with a burning torch in his hands.
4

2 BARUCH 6:5
And another malak came down from heaven and said to them, "Hold your torches and do not light them before I say it to you.
2 BARUCH 6:6
Because I was sent first to speak a Word to the earth and then to deposit in it what YAHWEH, the Most High, has commanded me."
2 BARUCH 6:7
And I saw that he descended in the Kodesh of HaKodesh and that he took from there the veil, the kodesh ephod, the mercy seat, the two tables, the kodesh raiment of the kohenim, the altar of incense, the forty-eight precious stones with which the kohenim were clothed, and all the kodesh vessels of the tabernacle.
2 BARUCH 6:8
And he said to the earth with a loud voice:
Earth, earth, earth, hear the Word of the ALMIGHTY YAHWEH, and receive the things which I commit to you,
and guard them until the last times,
so that you may restore them when you are ordered,
so that strangers may not get possession of them.
2 BARUCH 6:9
For the time has arrived when Yerusalem will also be delivered up for a time, until the moment that it will be said that it will be restored forever.
2 BARUCH 6:10
And the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them up.
2 BARUCH 7
2 BARUCH 7:1
And after these things I heard this malak saying to the malakim who held the torches:
2 BARUCH 7:2
Now destroy the walls and overthrow them to their foundations so that the enemies do not boast and say, "We have overthrown the wall of Zion and we have burnt down the place of the ALMIGHTY YAHWEH." And they restored me to the place where I once stood.
2 BARUCH 8
The Enemies Enter the City
2 BARUCH 8:1
Now the malakim did as he had commanded them; and when they had broken up the comers of the wall, a voice was heard from the midst of the Great Tabernacle after the wall had fallen, saying:
2 BARUCH 8:2
Enter, enemies, and come, adversaries, because he who guarded the house has left it.
5

2 BARUCH 8:3
And I, Baruch, went away.
2 BARUCH 8:4
And it happened after these things that the army of the Chaldeans entered and seized the house and all that is around it.
2 BARUCH 8:5
And they carried away the people into captivity and killed some of them. And they put King ZedekiYah in irons and sent him to the king of Babylon.
2 BARUCH 9
2 BARUCH 9:1
And I, Baruch, came with YermeYah, whose heart was found to be pure from sins, and who was not captured during the seizure of the city;
2 BARUCH 9:2
And we rent our garments, and wept and mourned, and fasted for seven days.
2 BARUCH 10
Baruch's lamentation
2 BARUCH 10:1
And it happened after seven days that the Word of YAHWEH came to me and said to me:
2 BARUCH 10:2
Tell YermeYah to go away in order to support the captives unto Babylon.
2 BARUCH 10:3
You, however, stay here in the desolation of Zion and I shall show you after these days what will happen at the end of days.
2 BARUCH 10:4
And I spoke to YermeYah as YAHWEH commanded me.
2 BARUCH 10:5
He, then, went away with the people, but I, Baruch, came back and sat in front of the doors of the Great Tabernacle, and I raised the following lamentation over Zion and said:
2 BARUCH 10:6
Blessed is he who was not born, or he who was born and died.
2 BARUCH 10:7
But we, the living, woe to us, because we have seen those afflictions of Zion, and that which has befallen Yerusalem.
2 BARUCH 10:8
I shall call the Sirens from the sea, and you, Lilin, come from the desert, and you, demons and dragons from the woods. Awake and gird up your loins to mourn, and raise lamentations with me, and mourn with me.
6

2 BARUCH 10:9
You, farmers, sow not again. And you, O earth, why do you give the fruit of your harvest? Keep within you the sweetness of your sustenance.
2 BARUCH 10:10
And you, vine, why do you still give your wine? For an offering will not be given again from you in Zion, and the firstfruits will not again be offered.
2 BARUCH 10:11
And you, heaven, keep your dew within you, and do not open the treasuries of rain.
2 BARUCH 10:12
And you, sun, keep the light of your rays within you. And you, moon, extinguish the multitude of your light. For why should the light rise again, where the light of Zion is darkened?
2 BARUCH 10:13
And you, bridegrooms, do not enter, and do not let the brides adorn themselves.
2 BARUCH 10:14
And you, wives, do not pray to bear children, for the barren will rejoice more. And those who have no children will be glad, and those who have children will be sad.
2 BARUCH 10:15
For why do they bear in pains only to bury in grief?
2 BARUCH 10:16
Or why should men have children again? Or why should the generation of their kind be named again, where this mother is lonely, and her children have been carried away in captivity?
2 BARUCH 10:17
Henceforth, do not speak anymore of beauty, and do not talk about comeliness.
2 BARUCH 10:18
You, kohenim, take the keys of the sanctuary, and cast them to the highest heaven, and give them to YAHWEH and say, "Guard YOUR house YOURSELF, because, behold, we have been found to be false stewards."
2 BARUCH 10:19
And you, virgins who spin fine linen, and silk with gold of Ophir, make haste and take all things, and cast them into the fire, so that it may carry them to HIM who made them. And the flame sends them to HIM who created them, so that the enemies do not take possession of them.
2 BARUCH 11
2 BARUCH 11:1
Now this I, Baruch, say to you, O Babylon: If you had lived in happiness and Zion in its splendor, it would have been a great sorrow to us that you had been equal to Zion.
2 BARUCH 11:2
But now, behold, the grief is infinite and the lamentation is unmeasurable, because, behold, you are happy and Zion has been destroyed.
7

2 BARUCH 11:3
Who will judge over these things? Or to whom shall we complain about that which has befallen us?
2 BARUCH 11:4
O YAHWEH, how have YOU borne it? Our fathers went to rest without grief and, behold, the righteous sleep at rest in the earth.
2 BARUCH 11:5
For they did not know this anguish nor did they hear that which has befallen us.
2 BARUCH 11:6
Would that you had ears, O earth and would that you had a heart, O dust, so that you might go and announce in the realm of death and say to the dead,
2 BARUCH 11:7
"You are more happy than we who live."
2 BARUCH 12
2 BARUCH 12:1
But I shall say as I think and I shall speak to you, O land, that which is happy.
2 BARUCH 12:2
The afternoon will not always burn nor will the rays of the sun always give light.
2 BARUCH 12:3
Do not think and do not expect that you will always have happiness and joy, and do not raise yourself too much and do not oppress.
2 BARUCH 12:4
For surely wrath will arise against you in its own time, because long-suffering is now held back, as it were, by reins.
2 BARUCH 12:5
And having said these things, I fasted for seven days.
2 BARUCH 13
The nations will be judged
2 BARUCH 13:1
And after these things, it happened that I, Baruch, was standing on Mount Zion and, behold, a voice came from the high heavens, saying to me:
2 BARUCH 13:2
Stand upon your feet, Baruch, and hear the Word of the ALMIGHTY YAHWEH.
2 BARUCH 13:3
Because you have been astonished at that which has befallen Zion, you will surely be preserved until the end of times to be for a testimony.
2 BARUCH 13:4
This means that if these happy cities will ever say, "Why has the ALMIGHTY YAHWEH brought upon us this retribution?",
8

2 BARUCH 13:5
You and those who are like you, those who have seen this evil and retribution coming over you and your nation in their own time, may say to them that the nations will be thoroughly punished."
2 BARUCH 13:6
And this they may expect.
2 BARUCH 13:7
And when they say in that time, "When?", you will say to them:
2 BARUCH 13:8
You who have drunk the clarified wine, you now drink its dregs, for the judgment of YAHWEH the Most High is impartial.
2 BARUCH 13:9
Therefore, HE did not spare HIS own sons first, but HE afflicted them as HIS enemies because they sinned.
2 BARUCH 13:10
Therefore, they were once punished, that they might be forgiven.
2 BARUCH 13:11
But now, you nations and tribes, you are guilty, because you have trodden the earth all this time, and because you have used creation unrighteously.
2 BARUCH 13:12
For I have always benefited you, and you have always denied the beneficence.
2 BARUCH 14
What is the profit of being righteous?
2 BARUCH 14:1
And I answered and said: Behold, YOU have shown me the course of times, and that which will happen after these things.
2 BARUCH 14:2
And YOU have told me that the retribution of that which has been spoken by YOU will come upon the nations. And now, I know there are many who have sinned and who have lived in happiness and who have left the world, but there will be few nations left in those times to which those Words can be spoken which YOU said.
2 BARUCH 14:3
For what is the advantage (of this), or what evil worse than that which we have seen befall us can we expect to see?
2 BARUCH 14:4
But I will continue to speak before YOU.
2 BARUCH 14:5
What have they profited who have knowledge before YOU, and who did not walk in vanity like the rest of the nations, and who did not say to the dead: "Give life to us," but always feared YOU and did not leave YOUR ways?
9

2 BARUCH 14:6
And, behold, they have been diligent and, nevertheless, YOU had no mercy on Zion on their account.
2 BARUCH 14:7
And if there are others who did evil, Zion should have been forgiven on account of the works of those who did moraly right works and should not have been overwhelmed because of the works of those who acted unrighteously.
2 BARUCH 14:8
O YAHWEH, Sovereign Master, who can understand YOUR judgment? Or who can explore the depth of YOUR way?
2 BARUCH 14:9
Or who can discern the majesty of YOUR path? Or who can discern YOUR incomprehensible counsel? Or who of those who are born has ever discovered the beginning and the end of YOUR Wisdom?
2 BARUCH 14:10
For we all have been made like breath.
2 BARUCH 14:11
For as breath ascends without human control and vanishes, so it is with the nature of men, who do not go away according to their own will, and who do not know what will happen to them in the end.
2 BARUCH 14:12
For the righteous justly have excellent hope for the end and go away from this habitation without fear because they possess with YOU a store of moraly right works which is preserved in treasuries.
2 BARUCH 14:13
Therefore, they leave this world without fear and are confident of the world which YOU have promised to them with an expectation full of joy.
2 BARUCH 14:14
But woe to those of us who have also now been treated shamefully and who await evils at that time.
2 BARUCH 14:15
But YOU know exactly what YOU have made of YOUR servants, for we are not able to understand that which is excellent like YOU, YAHWEH our Creator.
2 BARUCH 14:16
I shall continue to speak before YOUR presence, O YAHWEH, Sovereign Master.
2 BARUCH 14:17
When in the beginning the world did not exist with its inhabitants, YOU devised and spoke by means of YOUR Word and at the same time the works of YOUR creation stood before YOU.
2 BARUCH 14:18
And YOU said that YOU would make a man for this world as a guardian over YOUR works that it should be known that he was not created for the world, but the world for him.
10

2 BARUCH 14:19
And now, I see that the world which was made for us, behold, it remains; but we, for whom it was made, depart.
2 BARUCH 15
2 BARUCH 15:1
And YAHWEH answered and said to me: You are rightly astonished about man's departure, but your judgment about the evils which befell those who sin is incorrect.
2 BARUCH 15:2
And with regard to what you say about the righteous who are taken away and the wicked ones who are happy,
2 BARUCH 15:3
And with regard to what you say that man does not know your judgment,
2 BARUCH 15:4
For this reason, now, listen and I shall speak to you; pay attention and I shall let MY Words be heard.
2 BARUCH 15:5
It is true that man would not have understood MY judgment if he had not received the Torah and if he were not instructed with understanding.
2 BARUCH 15:6
But now, because he trespassed, having understanding, he will be punished because he has understanding.
2 BARUCH 15:7
And with regard to the righteous ones, those whom you said the world has come on their account, yes, also that which is coming is on their account.
2 BARUCH 15:8
For this world is to them a struggle and an effort with much trouble. And that accordingly which will come, a crown with great splendor.
2 BARUCH 16
2 BARUCH 16:1
And I answered and said: O YAHWEH, Sovereign Master, behold, the present years are few and evil, and who can inherit that which is unmeasurable in this short time?
2 BARUCH 17
2 BARUCH 17:1
And YAHWEH answered and said to me: With the Most High no account is taken of much time and of few years.
2 BARUCH 17:2
For what did it profit Adam that he lived nine hundred and thirty years and transgressed that which he was commanded?
11

2 BARUCH 17:3
Therefore, the multitude of time that he lived did not profit him, but it brought death and cut off the years of those who were born from him.
2 BARUCH 17:4
Or what did it harm Mosheh that he lived only one hundred and twenty years and, because he subjected himself to HIM who created him, he brought the Torah to the descendants of Yacob and he lighted a lamp to the generation of Yisrael?
2 BARUCH 18
2 BARUCH 18:1
And I answered and said: He who lighted took from the light, and there are few who imitated him.
2 BARUCH 18:2
But many whom he illuminated took from the darkness of Adam and did not rejoice in the light of the lamp.
2 BARUCH 19
2 BARUCH 19:1
And HE answered and said to me: Therefore he appointed a covenant for them at that time and said, "Behold, I appoint for you Life and death," and HE called heaven and earth as a witness against them.
2 BARUCH 19:2
For he knew that his time was short, but that heaven and earth will stay forever.
2 BARUCH 19:3
They, however, sinned and trespassed after his death, although they knew that they had the Torah to reprove them and that Light in which nothing could err, apart from the spheres, which witnessed, and ME. And I judge everything that exists.
2 BARUCH 19:4
You, however, should not think about this in your heart and you should not be afflicted because of the things which have been.
2 BARUCH 19:5
For now the end of times is at stake whether it be property, happiness, or shame; and not its beginning.
2 BARUCH 19:6
For when a man is happy in his youth and is treated badly in his old age, he forgets all happiness he possessed.
2 BARUCH 19:7
And further, when a man is badly treated in his youth but will be happy in the end, he does not remember his unhappiness anymore.
2 BARUCH 19:8
And further, listen: Even if everyone had been happy continually since the day death was decreed against those who trespassed, but was destroyed in the end, everything would have been in vain.
12

 2 BARUCH 20
2 BARUCH 20:1
Therefore, behold, the days will come and the times will hasten, more than the former, and the periods will hasten more than those which are gone, and the years will pass more quickly than the present ones.
2 BARUCH 20:2
Therefore, I now took away Zion to visit the world in its own time more speedily.
2 BARUCH 20:3
Now, however, remember everything which I commanded you and seal it in the interior of your mind.
2 BARUCH 20:4
And then I shall show you MY strong judgment and MY unexplorable ways.
2 BARUCH 20:5
Therefore, go away and sanctify yourself for seven days and do not eat bread and do not drink water and do not speak to anybody.
2 BARUCH 20:6
And after this time come to this place, and I shall reveal MYSELF to you, and I shall speak to you true things, and I shall command you with regard to the course of times, for they will come and will not tarry.
2 BARUCH 21
Prayer of Baruch, the Son of Neriah
2 BARUCH 21:1
I went from there and sat in the valley of Kidron in a cave of the earth and sanctified myself there and ate no bread, but I was not hungry; I drank no water, but I was not thirsty. And I stayed there until the seventh day as YAHWEH had commanded me.
2 BARUCH 21:2
And after this I came to the place where HE had spoken with me.
2 BARUCH 21:3
And it happened at sunset that my soul received many thoughts, and I began to speak in the presence of YAHWEH the Mighty One, and said:
2 BARUCH 21:4
O hear me, YOU who created the earth, the one who fixed the firmament by the Word and fastened the height of heaven by the Ruach, the one who in the beginning of the world called that which did not yet exist and they obeyed YOU.
2 BARUCH 21:5
YOU who gave commandments to the air with YOUR sign and have seen the things which are to come as well as those which have passed.
2 BARUCH 21:6
YOU who reign with great thoughts over the powers which stand before YOU, and who rules with indignation the countless kodesh beings, who are flame and fire, whom YOU created from the beginning, those who stand around YOUR throne.
13

2 BARUCH 21:7
For YOU alone (all) this exists so that YOU may create at once all that YOU want.
2 BARUCH 21:8
YOU are the one who causes the rain to fall on earth with a specific number of raindrops. YOU alone know the end of times before it has arrived. Hear my prayer.
2 BARUCH 21:9
For only YOU can sustain those who exist, those who have gone and those who will come, those who sin and those who have proved themselves to be righteous, since YOU are the Living One, the Inscrutable One.
2 BARUCH 21:10
For YOU are the only Living One, the Immortal One and the Inscrutable One, and YOU know the number of men.
2 BARUCH 21:11
And while many have sinned once, many others have proved themselves to be righteous.
2 BARUCH 21:12
YOU know where YOU have preserved the end of those who have sinned or the fulfillment of those who have proved themselves to be righteous.
2 BARUCH 21:13
For if only this life exists which everyone possesses here, nothing could be more bitter than this.
2 BARUCH 21:14
For of what help is strength which changes into weakness, or food in abundance which changes into famine, or beauty which changes into ugliness?
2 BARUCH 21:15
For the nature of men is always changeable.
2 BARUCH 21:16
For as we were once, we are no longer, and as we are now, we shall not remain in the future.
2 BARUCH 21:17
For if an end of all things had not been prepared, their beginning would have been senseless.
2 BARUCH 21:18
But let me know all that which comes from YOU, and regarding that which I ask YOU, enlighten me.
2 BARUCH 21:19
How long will corruption remain, and until when will the time of mortals be happy, and until when will those who pass away be polluted by the great wickedness in this world?
2 BARUCH 21:20
Therefore, command mercifully and confirm all that YOU have said that YOU would do so that YOUR Power will be recognized by those who believe that YOUR long-suffering means weakness.
14

2 BARUCH 21:21
And now show it to them, those who do not know, but who have seen that which has befallen us and our city, up to now, that it is in agreement with the long-suffering of YOUR Power, because YOU called us a beloved people on account of YOUR NAME.
2 BARUCH 21:22
From now, therefore, everything is in a state of dying.
2 BARUCH 21:23
Therefore, reprove the malak of death, and let YOUR splendor appear, and let the greatness of YOUR beauty be known, and let the realm of death be sealed so that it may not receive the dead from this time, and let the treasuries of the souls restore those who are enclosed in them.
2 BARUCH 21:24
For as many years have passed as those which passed since the days of Abraham, Yitschaq, and Yacob and all those who were like them, who sleep in the earth-those on whose account YOU have said YOU have created the world.
2 BARUCH 21:25
And now, show YOUR splendor soon and do not postpone that which was promised by YOU.
2 BARUCH 21:26
And it happened that when I had ended the words of this prayer, I became very weak.
2 BARUCH 22
2 BARUCH 22:1
And afterward it happened that, behold, the heaven was opened, and I saw and strength was given to me, and a Voice was heard from on high which said to me:
2 BARUCH 22:2
Baruch, Baruch, why are you disturbed?
2 BARUCH 22:3
Who starts on a journey and does not complete it? Or who will be comforted making a sea voyage unless he can reach a harbor?
2 BARUCH 22:4
Or he who promises to give a present to somebody; is it not a theft, unless it is fulfilled?
2 BARUCH 22:5
Or he who sows the earth; does he not lose everything unless he reaps its harvest in its own time?
2 BARUCH 22:6
Or he who plants a vineyard; does the planter expect to receive fruit from it, unless it grows until its appointed time?
2 BARUCH 22:7
Or a woman who has conceived; does she not surely kill the child when she bears untimely?
15

2 BARUCH 22:8
Or he who builds a house, can it be called a house, unless it is provided with a roof and is finished? Tell this to ME first.
2 BARUCH 23
2 BARUCH 23:1
And I answered and said: No, YAHWEH, the Sovereign Master.
2 BARUCH 23:2
And HE answered and said to me: Why, then, are you disturbed about that which you do not know, and why are you restless about that of which you do not possess any knowledge?
2 BARUCH 23:3
For as you have not forgotten men who exist and who have passed away, I remember those who will come.
2 BARUCH 23:4
For when Adam sinned and death was decreed against those who were to be born, the multitude of those who would be born was numbered. And for that number a place was prepared where the living ones might live and where the dead might be preserved.
2 BARUCH 23:5
No creature will live again unless the number that has been appointed is completed. For MY Ruach creates the living, and the realm of death receives the dead.
2 BARUCH 23:6
And further, it is given to you to hear that which will come after these times.
2 BARUCH 23:7
For truly, MY yashuah (salvation) which comes has drawn near and is not as far away as before.
2 BARUCH 24
2 BARUCH 24:1
For behold, the days are coming, and the scrolls will be opened in which are written the sins of all those who have sinned, and moreover, also the treasuries in which are brought together the righteousness of all those who have proven themselves to be righteous.
2 BARUCH 24:2
And it will happen at that time that you shall see, and many with you, the long-suffering of YAHWEH the Most High, which lasts from generation to generation, who has been long-suffering toward all who are born, both those who sinned and those who proved themselves to be righteous.
2 BARUCH 24:3
And I answered and said: But, behold, O YAHWEH, a man does not know the number of things which pass away nor those which come.
2 BARUCH 24:4
For behold, I also know what has befallen me; but that which will happen with our enemies, I do not know, or when YOU will command YOUR works.
16

 2 BARUCH 25
2 BARUCH 25:1
And YAHWEH answered and said to me: You also will be preserved until that time, namely until that sign which YAHWEH the Most High will bring about before the inhabitants of the earth at the end of days.
2 BARUCH 25:2
This then will be the sign:
2 BARUCH 25:3
When horror seizes the inhabitants of earth, and they fall into many tribulations and further, they fall into great torments.
2 BARUCH 25:4
And it will happen that they will say in their thoughts because of their great tribulations, "YAHWEH the Mighty One does not anymore remember the earth"; It will happen when they lose hope, that the time will awake.
2 BARUCH 26
The apocalypse of the twelve calamities and the coming of the Messiah
2 BARUCH 26:1
And I answered and said: That tribulation which will be will it last a long time; and that distress, will it embrace many years?
2 BARUCH 27
2 BARUCH 27:1
And YAHWEH answered and said to me: That time will be divided into twelve parts, and each part has been preserved for that for which it was appointed.
2 BARUCH 27:2
In the first part: the beginning of commotions.
2 BARUCH 27:3
In the second part: the slaughtering of the great.
2 BARUCH 27:4
In the third part: the fall of many into death.
2 BARUCH 27:5
In the fourth part: the drawing of the sword.
2 BARUCH 27:6
In the fifth part: famine and the withholding of rain.
2 BARUCH 27:7
In the sixth part: earthquakes and terrors.
2 BARUCH 27:8
In the eighth part: a multitude of ghosts and the appearances of demons.
  2 BARUCH 27:9
In the ninth part: the fall of fire.
17

2 BARUCH 27:10
In the tenth part: rape and much violence.
2 BARUCH 27:11
In the eleventh part: injustice and unchastity.
2 BARUCH 27:12
In the twelfth part: disorder and a mixture of all that has been before.
2 BARUCH 27:13
These parts of that time will be preserved and will be mixed, one with another, and they will minister to each other.
2 BARUCH 27:14
For some of these parts will withhold a part of themselves and take from others and will accomplish that which belongs to them and to others; hence, those who live on earth in those days will not understand that it is the end of times.
2 BARUCH 28
2 BARUCH 28:1
But everyone who will understand will be wise at that time.
2 BARUCH 28:2
For the measure and the calculation of that time will be two parts: weeks of seven weeks.
2 BARUCH 28:3
And I answered and said: It is excellent that man should come so far and see, but it is better that he should not come so far lest he fall.
2 BARUCH 28:4
But I shall also say this:
2 BARUCH 28:5
Will he who is incorruptible despise those who are corruptible, and will he despise what happens with those who are corruptible so that he might only look to those who are not corruptible?
2 BARUCH 28:6
But when, YAHWEH, these things will surely come of which YOU spoke to me before, let me also know this, if I have found free unmerited favor and pardon in YOUR eyes:
2 BARUCH 28:7
Is it in one place or in one part of the earth that these things will come or will they be noticed by the whole earth?
2 BARUCH 29
2 BARUCH 29:7
And YAHWEH answered and said to me: That which will happen at that time bears upon the whole earth. Therefore, all who live will notice it.
2 BARUCH 29:2
For at that time I shall only protect those found in this land at that time.
18

2 BARUCH 29:3
And it will happen that when all that which should come to pass in these parts has been accomplished, the Anointed One will begin to be revealed.
2 BARUCH 29:4
And Behemoth will reveal itself from its place, and Leviathan will come from the sea, the two great monsters which I created on the fifth day of creation and which I shall have kept until that time. And they will be nourishment for all who are left.
2 BARUCH 29:5
The earth will also yield fruits ten thousand fold. And on one vine will be one thousand branches, and one branch will produce one thousand clusters, and one cluster will produce one thousand grapes, and one grape will produce a cor of wine.
2 BARUCH 29:6
And those who are hungry will enjoy themselves and they will, moreover, see marvels every day.
2 BARUCH 29:7
For winds will go out in front of ME every morning to bring the fragrance of aromatic fruits and clouds at the end of the day to distill the dew of health.
2 BARUCH 29:8
And it will happen at that time that the treasury of manna will come down again from on high, and they will eat of it in those years because these are they who will have arrived at the consummation of time.
2 BARUCH 30
2 BARUCH 30:1
And it will happen after these things when the time of the appearance of the Anointed One has been fulfilled and He returns with splendor, that then all who sleep in hope of Him will rise.
2 BARUCH 30:2
And it will happen at that time that those treasuries will be opened in which the number of the souls of the righteous were kept, and they will go out and the multitudes of the souls will appear together, in One assemblage, of one mind. And the first ones will enjoy themselves and the last ones will not be sad.
2 BARUCH 30:3
For they know that the time has come of which it is said that it is the end of times.
2 BARUCH 30:4
But the souls of the wicked will the more waste away when they shall see all these things.
2 BARUCH 30:5
For they know that their torment has come and that their perditions have arrived.
  2 BARUCH 31
Baruch speaks to the people
19

2 BARUCH 31:1
And it happened after these things, that I went to the people and said to them: Assemble to me all our elders and I shall speak words to you.
2 BARUCH 31:2
I And they all assembled in the valley of the Kidron.
2 BARUCH 31:3
And I began to speak and said to them: Hear, O Yisrael, and I shall speak to you, and you, O seed of Yacob, pay attention, and I shall teach you.
2 BARUCH 31:4
Do not forget Zion but remember the distress of Yerusalem.
2 BARUCH 31:5
For, behold, the days are coming, that all that has been will be taken away to be destroyed, and it will become as though it had not been.
2 BARUCH 32
2 BARUCH 32:1
You, however, if you prepare your minds to sow into them the fruits of the Torah, YAHWEH shall protect you in the time in which YAHWEH the Mighty One shall shake the entire creation.
2 BARUCH 32:2
For after a short time, the building of Zion will be shaken in order that it will be rebuilt.
2 BARUCH 32:3
That building will not remain; but it will again be uprooted after some time and will remain desolate for a time.
2 BARUCH 32:4
And after that it is necessary that it will be renewed in splendor and that it will be perfected into eternity.
2 BARUCH 32:5
We should not, therefore, be so sad regarding the evil which has come now, but much more (distressed) regarding that which is in the future.
2 BARUCH 32:6
For greater than the two evils will be the trial when YAHWEH the Mighty One will renew HIS creation.
2 BARUCH 32:7
And now, do not draw near to me for some days and do not call upon me until I shall come to you.
2 BARUCH 32:8
And it happened after having said all these words to them that I, Baruch, went my way. And when the people saw that I went away, they raised their voices and lamented and said:
2 BARUCH 32:9
Where are you going from us, Baruch, and do you leave us as a father who leaves his children as orphans and goes away from them?
20

 2 BARUCH 33
2 BARUCH 33:1
These are the commands which your friend YermeYah, the prophet, gave to you. And he said to you,
2 BARUCH 33:2
"Look to this people during the time I am absent, while I help the rest of our brothers in Babylon, against whom has been declared the sentence that they should be carried away into captivity."
2 BARUCH 33:3
And now, if you abandon us too, it would have been better for all of us that we shall die first, and that then you should abandon us.
2 BARUCH 34
2 BARUCH 34:1
And I answered and said to the people:
Heaven forbid that I should abandon you or that I should go away from you. But I shall go to the Kodesh of Ha Kodeshim to ask from YAHWEH the Mighty One on behalf of you and Zion so that I may receive in some ways more Light, and after that I shall return to you.
2 BARUCH 35
The apocalypse of the forest, the vine, the fountain, and the cedar
2 BARUCH 35:1
And I, Baruch, went to the Kodesh place and sat on the ruins and wept and said:
2 BARUCH 35:2
O that my eyes were springs, and my eyelids, that they were a fountain of tears.
2 BARUCH 35:3
For how shall I be sad over Zion, and lament over Yerusalem?
2 BARUCH 35:4
For at the place where now I am prostrate, the high kohenim used to offer Kodesh sacrifices, and placed thereon incense of fragrant spices.
2 BARUCH 35:5
Now, however, that of which we are proud has become dust, and that which our soul desired is ashes.
2 BARUCH 36
2 BARUCH 36:1
And when I had said this, I fell asleep at that place and saw a vision in the night.
2 BARUCH 36:2
And behold there was a forest with trees that was planted on the plain and surrounded by high mountains and rugged rocks. And the forest occupied much space.
21

2 BARUCH 36:3
And behold, over against it a vine arose, and from under it a fountain (ran) peacefully.
2 BARUCH 36:4
And that fountain came to the forest and changed into great waves, and those waves submerged the forest and suddenly uprooted the entire forest and overthrew all the mountains which surrounded it.
2 BARUCH 36:5
And the height of the forest became low, and that top of the mountains became low. And that fountain became so strong that it left nothing of the great forest except one cedar .
2 BARUCH 36:6
When it had also cast that one down, it destroyed the entire forest and uprooted it so that nothing was left of it, and its place was not even known anymore. Then that vine arrived with the fountain in shalom and in great tranquillity and arrived at a place which was not far away from the cedar, and they brought to him that cedar which had been cast down.
2 BARUCH 36:7
And I saw, and behold, that vine opened its mouth and spoke and said to the cedar, "Are you not that cedar which remained of the forest of wickedness? Because of you, wickedness remained and has been done during all these years, but never goodness.
2 BARUCH 36:8
And you possessed power over that which did not belong to you; you did not even show compassion to that which did belong to you. And you extended your power over those who were living far from you, and you keep those who are close to you in the nets of your wickedness, and you uplift your soul always like one who could not be uprooted.
2 BARUCH 36:9
But now your time has hastened and your hour has come.
2 BARUCH 36:10
Therefore O cedar, follow the forest which has departed before you and become ashes with it, and let your earth be mixed together.
2 BARUCH 36:11
And now, sleep in distress and rest in pain until your last time comes in which you will return to be tormented even more."
2 BARUCH 37
2 BARUCH 37:1
And after these things I saw that the cedar was burning and the vine growing, while it and all around it became a valley full of unfading flowers. And I awoke and arose.
22

 2 BARUCH 38
Interpretation of the apocalypse
2 BARUCH 38:1
And I prayed and said: O YAHWEH, the Sovereign Master, YOU are the ONE who has always enlightened those who conduct themselves with understanding.
2 BARUCH 38:2
YOUR Torah is Life, and YOUR wisdom is the right way.
2 BARUCH 38:3
Now, show me the explanation of this vision.
2 BARUCH 38:4
For YOU know that my soul has always been associated with YOUR Torah, and that I did not depart from YOUR wisdom from my earliest days.
2 BARUCH 39
2 BARUCH 39:1
And YAHWEH answered and said to me: Baruch, this is the explanation of the vision which you have seen.
2 BARUCH 39:2
As you have seen the great forest surrounded by high and rocky mountains, this is the world:
2 BARUCH 39:3
Behold, the days will come when this kingdom that destroyed Zion once will be destroyed and that it will be subjected to that which will come after it.
2 BARUCH 39:4
This again will also be destroyed after some time. And another, a third, will rise and also that will possess power in its own time and will be destroyed.
2 BARUCH 39:5
After that a fourth kingdom arises whose power is harsher and more evil than those which were before it, and it will reign a multitude of times like the trees on the plain, and it will rule the times and exalt itself more than the cedars of Lebanon.
2 BARUCH 39:6
And the Truth will hide itself in this and all who are polluted with unrighteousness will flee to it like the evil beasts flee and creep into the forest.
2 BARUCH 39:7
And it will happen when the time of its fulfillment is approaching in which it will fall, that at that time the dominion of MY Anointed One which is like the fountain and the vine, will be revealed. And when it has revealed itself, it will uproot the multitude of its host.
2 BARUCH 39:8
And that which you have seen, namely the tall cedar, which remained of that forest, and with regard to the words which the vine said to it which you heard, this is the meaning.
23

 2 BARUCH 40
2 BARUCH 40:1
The last ruler who is left alive at that time will be bound, whereas the entire host will be destroyed. And they will carry Him on Mount Zion, and MY Anointed One will convict him of all his wicked deeds and will assemble and set before him all the works of his hosts.
2 BARUCH 40:2
And after these things He will kill him and protect the rest of MY people who will be found in the place that I have chosen.
2 BARUCH 40:3
And His dominion will last forever until the world of corruption has ended and until the times which have been mentioned before have been fulfilled.
2 BARUCH 40:4
This is your vision, and this is its explanation.
2 BARUCH 41
About the apostates and the believers
2 BARUCH 41:1
And I answered and said: For whom and for how many will these things be? Or who will be worthy to live in that time?
2 BARUCH 41:2
I shall now say before YOU everything that I think, and I shall ask YOU about the things of which I meditate.
2 BARUCH 41:3
For behold, I see many of YOUR people who separated themselves from YOUR statutes and who have cast away from them the yoke of YOUR Torah.
2 BARUCH 41:4
Further, I have seen others who left behind their vanity and who have fled under YOUR wings.
2 BARUCH 41:5
What will, therefore, happen with those? Or how will that last time receive them?
2 BARUCH 41:6
Their time will surely not be weighed exactly, and they will certainly not be judged as the scale indicates?
2 BARUCH 42
2 BARUCH 42:1
And YAHWEH answered and said to me:
2 BARUCH 42:2
Also these things I shall show you. As for what you said: "To whom and to how many will these things be?" The tov that was mentioned before will be to those who have believed, and the opposite of these things will be to those who have despised.
24

2 BARUCH 42:3
And as for that which you said with regard to those who have drawn near and to those who have withdrawn, this is the explanation.
2 BARUCH 42:4
As for those who have first subjected themselves and have withdrawn later and who mingled themselves with the seed of the mingled nations, their first time will be considered as mountains.
2 BARUCH 42:5
And those who first did not know Life and who later knew it exactly and who mingled with the seed of the people who have separated themselves, their first time will be considered as mountains.
2 BARUCH 42:6
And times will inherit times, and periods periods, and they will receive from one another. And then, with a view to the end, all will be compared according to the length of times and the hours of periods.
2 BARUCH 42:7
For corruption will take away those who belong to it, and Life those who belong to it.
2 BARUCH 42:8
And dust will be called, and told, "Give back that which does not belong to you and raise up all that you have kept until its own time."
2 BARUCH 43
2 BARUCH 43:1
You, however, Baruch, strengthen your heart with a view to that which has been said to you, and understand that which has been revealed to you because you have many consolations which will last forever.
2 BARUCH 43:2
For you will go away from this place and leave the regions which are now before your eyes. And you shall forget that which is corruptible and not again remember that which is among the mortal ones.
2 BARUCH 43:3
Go away, therefore, and command your people and come to this place and afterward fast seven days. And then I shall come to you and speak with you.
2 BARUCH 44
Baruch speaks to the people
2 BARUCH 44:1
And I, Baruch, went from there and came to my people and called my first-born son and the Gedaliahs, my friends, and seven of the elders of the people and said to them:
2 BARUCH 44:2
Behold, I go to my fathers in accordance with the way of the whole earth.
25

2 BARUCH 44:3
You, however, do not withdraw from the way of the Torah, but guard and admonish the people who are left lest they withdraw from the commandments of YAHWEH the Mighty One.
2 BARUCH 44:4
For you see that HE whom we serve is righteous and that our Creator is impartial.
2 BARUCH 44:5
And see what has befallen Zion and what happened to Yerusalem,
2 BARUCH 44:6
that the judgment of YAHWEH the Mighty One will be made known, as well as HIS ways which are inscrutable and right.
2 BARUCH 44:7
For when you endure and persevere in HIS fear and do not forget HIS Torah, the time again will take a turn for the better for you. And they will participate in the consolation of Zion.
2 BARUCH 44:8
For that which is now is nothing. But that which is in the future will be very great.
2 BARUCH 44:9
For everything will pass away which is corruptible, and everything that dies will go away, and all present time will be forgotten, and there will be no remembrance of the present time which is polluted by evils.
2 BARUCH 44:10
For he who runs now runs in vain and he who is happy will fall quickly and be humiliated.
2 BARUCH 44:11
For that which will be in the future, that is what one will look for, and that which comes later, that is what we shall hope for. For there is a time that does not pass away.
2 BARUCH 44:12
And that period is coming which will remain forever; and there is the new world which does not carry back to corruption those who enter into its beginning, and which has no mercy on those who come into torment or those who are living in it, and it does not carry to perdition.
2 BARUCH 44:13
For those are the ones who will inherit this time of which it is spoken, and to these is the heritage of the promised time.
2 BARUCH 44:14
These are they who prepared for themselves treasures of wisdom. And stores of insight are found with them. And they have not withdrawn from mercy and they have preserved the Truth of the Torah.
2 BARUCH 44:15
For the coming world will be given to these, but the habitation of the many others will be in the fire.
 2 BARUCH 45
26

2 BARUCH 45:1
You, therefore, admonish the people as much as you can. For this is our work.
2 BARUCH 45:2
For, when you instruct them, you will make them alive.
2 BARUCH 46
2 BARUCH 46:1
And my son and the elders of the people said to me: Did YAHWEH the Mighty One humiliate us to such an extent that HE will take you away from us quickly?
2 BARUCH 46:2
And shall we truly be in darkness, and will there be no Light anymore for that people who are left?
2 BARUCH 46:3
For where shall we again investigate the Torah, or who will distinguish between death and Life for us?
2 BARUCH 46:4
And I said to them: I cannot resist the throne of YAHWEH the Mighty One. But Yisrael will not be in want of a wise man, nor the tribe of Yacob, a son of the Torah.
2 BARUCH 46:5
But only prepare your heart so that you obey the Torah, and be subject to those who are wise and understanding with fear. And prepare your soul that you shall not depart from them.
2 BARUCH 46:6
If you do this, those pleasant tidings will come to you of which I spoke to you earlier, and you will not fall into the torment of which I spoke to you earlier.
2 BARUCH 46:7
But with regard to the word that I shall be taken up, I did not let it be known to them at that time, not even to my son.
2 BARUCH 47
2 BARUCH 47:1
And after I had left, having dismissed them, I returned from there and said to them: Behold, I go to Hebron, for to there YAHWEH the Mighty One has sent me.
2 BARUCH 47:2
And I arrived at that place where the Word was spoken to me, and I sat there and fasted seven days.
2 BARUCH 48
Prayer of Baruch
2 BARUCH 48:1
And it happened after seven days that I prayed before YAHWEH the Mighty One and said:
27

2 BARUCH 48:2
O YAHWEH, YOU summon the coming of the times, and they stand before YOU. YOU cause the display of power of the worlds to pass away and they do not resist YOU. YOU arrange the course of the periods, and they obey YOU.
2 BARUCH 48:3
Only YOU know the length of the generations, and YOU do not reveal YOUR secrets to many.
2 BARUCH 48:4
YOU make known the multitude of the fire, and YOU weigh the lightness of the wind.
2 BARUCH 48:5
YOU investigate the end of the heights, and YOU scrutinize the depths of darkness.
2 BARUCH 48:6
YOU command the number which will pass away, and which will be preserved. And YOU prepare a house for those who will be.
2 BARUCH 48:7
YOU remember the beginning which YOU created, and YOU do not forget that destruction which will come.
2 BARUCH 48:8
With signs of fear and threat YOU command the flames, and they change into winds. And with the Word YOU bring to Life that which does not exist, and with great Power YOU hold that which has not yet come.
2 BARUCH 48:9
YOU instruct the creation with YOUR understanding, and YOU give wisdom to the spheres so that they minister according to their positions.
2 BARUCH 48:10
Innumerable hosts stand before YOU, and serve peacefully YOUR sign according to their positions.
2 BARUCH 48:11
Hear YOUR servant, and regard my appeal.
2 BARUCH 48:12
For we are born in a short time, and in a short time we return.
2 BARUCH 48:13
With YOU, however, the hours are like times, and the days like generations.
2 BARUCH 48:14
Be, therefore, not angry at man because he is nothing; and do not take count of our works; for what are we?
2 BARUCH 48:15
For behold, by YOUR gift we come into the world, and we do go not of our own will.
2 BARUCH 48:16
For we did not say to our parents: "Beget us," nor have we sent to the realm of death saying: "Receive us."
28

2 BARUCH 48:17
What therefore is our strength that we can bear YOUR wrath, or what are we that we can endure YOUR judgment?
2 BARUCH 48:18
Protect us in YOUR free unmerited favor and pardon, and in YOUR mercy help us.
2 BARUCH 48:19
Look at the small ones who submit to YOU, and deliver all those who come to YOU. And do not take away the hope of our people, and do not make short the times of our help.
2 BARUCH 48:20
For these are the people whom YOU have elected, and this is the nation of which YOU found no equal.
2 BARUCH 48:21
But I shall speak to YOU now, and I shall say as my heart thinks.
2 BARUCH 48:22
In YOU we have put our trust, because, behold, YOUR Torah is with us, and we know that we do not fall as long as we keep YOUR statutes.
2 BARUCH 48:23
We shall always be blessed; at least, we did not mingle with the nations. For we are all a people of the NAME; we, who received one Torah from YAHWEH the One.
2 BARUCH 48:24
And that Torah that is among us will help us, and that excellent wisdom which is in us will support us.
2 BARUCH 48:25
And when I had prayed these things I became very weak.
2 BARUCH 48:26
And HE answered and said to me: You have prayed honestly, Baruch, and all your words have been heard.
2 BARUCH 48:27
But MY judgment asks for its own, and MY Torah demands its right.
2 BARUCH 48:28
For from your words I shall answer you, and from your prayer I shall speak with you.
2 BARUCH 48:29
Because it is as follows: There is nothing that will be destroyed unless it acted wickedly, if it had been able to do something without remembering MY goodness and accepting MY long-suffering.
2 BARUCH 48:30
For this reason surely you will be taken up, as I said to you before.
2 BARUCH 48:31
And the time will come of which I spoke to you and that true is appearing which brings affliction. For it will come and pass away with enormous vehemence; and arriving in the heat of indignation, it will be turbulent.
29

2 BARUCH 48:32
And it will be in those days that all inhabitants of the earth will live with each other in shalom, because they do not know that MY judgment has come near.
2 BARUCH 48:33
For in that time there will not be found many wise men and there will also be not many intelligent ones, but, in addition, they who know will be silent more and more.
2 BARUCH 48:34
And there will be many tidings and not a few rumors, and the works of the phantoms will be visible, and not a few promises will be told, some idle and others affirmed.
2 BARUCH 48:35
And honor will change itself into shame, and strength will be humiliated to contempt, and the strong one will be broken down, and beauty will become contemptible.
2 BARUCH 48:36
And many will say to many in that time, "Where did the multitude of intelligence hide itself and where did the multitude of wisdom depart?"
2 BARUCH 48:37
And when one thinks about these things, jealousy will arise in those who did not think much of themselves; and passion will take hold of those who were peaceful; and many will be agitated by wrath to injure many; and they will raise armies to shed blood; and they will perish with those in the end.
2 BARUCH 48:38
And it will happen in that time that a change of times will reveal itself openly for the eyes of everyone because they polluted themselves in all those times and caused oppression, and each one walked in his own works and did not remember the Torah of YAHWEH the Mighty One.
2 BARUCH 48:39
Therefore, a fire will consume their thoughts, and with a flame the meditations of their kidneys will be examined. For the Judge will come and will not hesitate.
2 BARUCH 48:40
For each of the inhabitants of the earth knew when he acted unrighteously, and they did not know MY Torah because of their pride.
2 BARUCH 48:41
But many will surely weep at that time-more, however, because of the living ones than of the dead.
2 BARUCH 48:42
And I answered and said: O Adam, what did you do to all who were born after you? And what will be said of the first Eve who obeyed the serpent,
2 BARUCH 48:43
so that this whole multitude is going to corruption? And countless are those whom the fire devours.
2 BARUCH 48:44
But again I shall speak before YOU.
2 BARUCH 48:45
YOU, O YAHWEH, Sovereign Master, YOU know that which is in YOUR creation,
30

2 BARUCH 48:46
for YOU commanded the dust one day to produce Adam; and YOU knew the number of those who are born from him and how they sinned before YOU, those who existed and who did not recognize YOU as their Creator.
2 BARUCH 48:47
And concerning all of those, their end will put them to shame, and YOUR Torah which they transgressed will repay them on YOUR day.
2 BARUCH 48:48
And HE answered and said to me: But now, let us cease talking about the wicked and inquire about the righteous.
2 BARUCH 48:49
And I will tell about their blessedness and I shall not be silent about their splendor which is kept for them.
2 BARUCH 48:50
For surely, as you endured much labor in the short time in which you live in this passing world, so you will receive great Light in that world which has no end.
2 BARUCH 49
2 BARUCH 49:1
But further, I ask YOU, O YAHWEH the Mighty One; and I shall ask free unmerited and pardon from YOU who created all things.
2 BARUCH 49:2
In which shape will the living live in YOUR day? Or how will remain their splendor which will be after that?
2 BARUCH 49:3
Will they, perhaps, take again this present form, and will they put on the chained members which are in evil and by which evils are accomplished? Or will you perhaps change these things which have been in the world, as also the world itself?
2 BARUCH 50
2 BARUCH 50:1
And HE answered and said to me: Listen, Baruch, to this Word and write down in the memory of your heart all that you shall learn.
2 BARUCH 50:2
For the earth will surely give back the dead at that time; it receives them now in order to keep them, not changing anything in their form. But as it has received them so it will give them back. And as I have delivered them to it so it will raise them.
2 BARUCH 50:3
For then it will be necessary to show those who live that the dead are living again, and that those who went away have come back.
2 BARUCH 50:4
And it will be that when they have recognized each other, those who know each other at this moment, then MY judgment will be strong, and those things which have been spoken of before will come.
31

 2 BARUCH 51
2 BARUCH 51:1
And it will happen after this day which I appointed is over that both the shape of those who are found to be guilty as also the splendor of those who have proved to be righteous will be changed.
2 BARUCH 51:2
For the shape of those who now act wickedly will be made more evil than it is (now) so that they shall suffer torment.
2 BARUCH 51:3
Also, as for the honor and splendor of those who proved to be righteous on account of MY Torah, those who possessed intelligence in their life, and those who planted the root of wisdom in their heart; their honor and splendor will then be magnified by transformations, and the shape of their face will be changed into the Light of their beauty so that they may acquire and receive the undying world which is promised to them.
2 BARUCH 51:4
Therefore, especially they who will then come will be sad, because they despised MY Torah and stopped their ears lest they hear wisdom and receive intelligence.
2 BARUCH 51:5
When they, therefore, will see that those over whom they are exalted now will then be more exalted and magnified than they, then both these and those will be changed, these into the honor and splendor of malakim and those into startling visions and horrible shapes; and they will waste away even more.
2 BARUCH 51:6
For they will first see and then they will go away to be tormented.
2 BARUCH 51:7
Miracles, however, will appear at their own time to those who are saved because of their works and for whom the Torah is now a hope, and intelligence, expectation, and wisdom a trust.
2 BARUCH 51:8
For they shall see that world which is now invisible to them, and they will see a time which is now hidden to them.
2 BARUCH 51:9
And time will no longer make them older.
2 BARUCH 51:10
For they will live in the heights of that world and they will be like the malakim and be equal to the stars. And they will be changed into any shape which they wished, from beauty to loveliness, and from light to the splendor of honor.
2 BARUCH 51:11
For the extents of Kingdom Paradise will be spread out for them, and to them will be shown the beauty of the majesty of the living beings under the throne, as well as all the hosts of the malakim, those who are held by MY Word now lest they show themselves, and those who are withheld by MY command so that they may stand at their places until their coming has arrived.
32

2 BARUCH 51:12
And the excellence of the righteous will then be greater than that of the malakim.
2 BARUCH 51:13
For the first will receive the last, those whom they expected; and the last, those of whom they had heard that they had gone away.
2 BARUCH 51:14
For they have been saved from this world of affliction and have put down the burden of anguishes.
2 BARUCH 51:15
Because of which men lost their life and for what have those who were on the earth exchanged their soul?
2 BARUCH 51:16
For once they chose for themselves that time which cannot pass away without afflictions. And they chose for themselves that time of which the end is full of lamentations and evils. And they have denied the world that does not make those who come to it older. And they have rejected the time which causes splendor so that they are not coming to the splendor of which I spoke to you before.
2 BARUCH 52
2 BARUCH 52:1
And I answered and said: How shall we forget those for whom at that time woe is preserved?
2 BARUCH 52:2
And why are we again sad for those who die? Or why do we weep for those who go into the realm of death?
2 BARUCH 52:3
The lamentations should be kept for the beginning of that coming torment; let the tears be laid down for the coming of that destruction which will then come.
2 BARUCH 52:4
But with a view of these things, I shall also speak.
2 BARUCH 52:5
And concerning the righteous ones, what will they do now?
2 BARUCH 52:6
And HE answered and said: Enjoy yourselves in the suffering which you suffer now. For why do you look for the decline of your enemies?
2 BARUCH 52:7
Prepare your souls for that which is kept for you, and make ready your souls for the reward which is preserved for you. And when HE had said this I fell asleep there.
  2 BARUCH 53
The apocalypse of the clouds
33

2 BARUCH 53:1
And I saw a vision. And behold, a cloud was coming up from the great sea. And I was looking at it, and behold, it was entirely filled with black water and there were many colors in that water. And something like great lightning appeared at its top.
2 BARUCH 53:2
And I saw that the cloud was rapidly passing in a quick run and covering the whole earth.
2 BARUCH 53:3
And it happened after this that the cloud began to pour the water that it contained upon the earth.
2 BARUCH 53:4
And I saw that the water which descended from it was not of the same likeness.
2 BARUCH 53:5
For at first, it was very black until a certain time. And then, I saw that the water became bright, but there was not much of it. And after this, I saw black water again, and after this bright again, and black again and bright again.
2 BARUCH 53:6
This, now, happened twelve times, but the black were always more than the bright.
2 BARUCH 53:7
And it happened at the end of the cloud that, behold, it poured black water and it was much darker than all the water that had been before. And fire was mingled with it. And where that water descended, it brought about devastation and destruction.
2 BARUCH 53:8
And after this I saw how the lightning which I had seen at the top of the cloud seized it and pressed it down to the earth.
2 BARUCH 53:9
That lightning shone much more, so that it lighted the whole earth and healed the regions where the last waters had descended and where it had brought about destruction.
2 BARUCH 53:10
And it occupied the whole earth and took command of it.
2 BARUCH 53:11
And after this I saw, behold, twelve rivers came from the sea and surrounded the lightning and became subject to it.
2 BARUCH 53:12
And because of my fear I awoke.
2 BARUCH 54
Prayer of Baruch
 34

2 BARUCH 54:1
And I asked YAHWEH the Mighty One and said: YOU alone, O YAHWEH, knew the heights of the world beforehand and that which will happen in the times which YOU bring about by YOUR Word. And against the works of the inhabitants of the earth YOU hasten the beginnings of the times. And the ends of the periods YOU alone know.
2 BARUCH 54:2
YOU are the one for whom nothing is hard; but YOU are, however, the one who easily accomplishes all by a sign.
2 BARUCH 54:3
YOU are the one to whom both the depths and the heights come together, and whose Word the beginnings of the periods serve.
2 BARUCH 54:4
YOU are the one who reveals to those who fear that which is prepared for them so that YOU may comfort them.
2 BARUCH 54:5
YOU show YOUR mighty works to those who do not know. YOU pull down the enclosure for those who have no experience and enlighten the darknesses, and reveal the secrets to those who are spotless, to those who subjected themselves to YOU and YOUR Torah in faith.
2 BARUCH 54:6
YOU showed this vision to YOUR servant; open to me its exposition also.
2 BARUCH 54:7
For I know that I have received the answer regarding the subjects about which I asked YOU, and that YOU gave me a revelation about that which I asked, and that YOU have let me know with what voice I should honor YOU or from which members I should cause honor and praise to go up to YOU.
2 BARUCH 54:8
For if my members should be mouths and the hairs of my head voices, even so I should not be able to honor YOU properly; and I should not be able to utter YOUR splendor or to express the excellence of YOUR beauty.
2 BARUCH 54:9
For who am I among men or what is my significance among those who are more excellent than I that I have heard all these marvelous things from YAHWEH the Most High and innumerable promises from HIM who created me?
2 BARUCH 54:10
Blessed is my mother among those who bear, and praised among women is she who bore me.
2 BARUCH 54:11
For I shall not be silent in honoring YAHWEH the Mighty One but with the voice of reverence I shall narrate HIS marvelous works.
2 BARUCH 54:12
For who is able to imitate YOUR miracles, O YAHWEH, or who understands YOUR deep thoughts of Life?
35

2 BARUCH 54:13
For with YOUR counsel, YOU reign over all creation which YOUR right hand has created, and YOU have established the whole fountain of Light with YOURSELF, and YOU have prepared under YOUR throne the treasures of wisdom.
2 BARUCH 54:14
And those who do not love YOUR Torah are justly perishing. And the torment of judgment will fall upon those who have not subjected themselves to YOUR Power.
2 BARUCH 54:15
For, although Adam sinned first and has brought death upon all who were not in his own time, yet each of them who has been born from him has prepared for himself the coming torment. And further, each of them has chosen for himself the coming splendor.
2 BARUCH 54:16
For truly, the one who believes will receive reward.
2 BARUCH 54:17
But now, turn yourselves to destruction, you unrighteous ones who are living now, for you will be visited suddenly, since you have once rejected the understanding of YAHWEH the Most High.
2 BARUCH 54:18
For HIS works have not taught you, nor has the artful work of HIS creation which has existed always persuaded you.
2 BARUCH 54:19
Adam is, therefore, not the cause, except only for himself, but each of us has become our own Adam.
2 BARUCH 54:20
YOU, however, O YAHWEH, explain to me what YOU have revealed to me. And inform me about that which I asked YOU.
2 BARUCH 54:21
For at the end of the world, a retribution will be demanded with regard to those who have done wickedly in accordance with their wickedness, and YOU will honor the faithful ones in accordance with their faith.
2 BARUCH 54:22
For those who are among YOUR own, YOU rule; and those who sin, YOU blot out among YOUR own.
2 BARUCH 55
Interpretation of the apocalypse
2 BARUCH 55:1
And it happened that when I had finished the words of this prayer, I sat down there under a tree to rest in the shadow of its branches.
36

2 BARUCH 55:2
And I was surprised and astonished, and I pondered in my thoughts about the multitude of the goodness which the sinners who are on earth have rejected from them, and about the great punishment which they have despised, when they knew that they should be punished because of the sins they have committed.
2 BARUCH 55:3
And while I was pondering these and similar things, behold, Ramael, the malak who is set over true visions, was sent to me and said to me:
2 BARUCH 55:4
Why does your heart trouble you, Baruch, and why are you disturbed by your thought?
2 BARUCH 55:5
For if you are already disturbed, only hearing about the judgment, what about when you see it with your eyes openly?
2 BARUCH 55:6
And if you are already so disturbed by the expectation with which you expect the day of YAHWEH the Mighty One, what about when you arrive at its coming?
2 BARUCH 55:7
And if you are so fully terrified by the Words of the announcement of the punishment of those who have transgressed, how much more when this event itself will reveal marvelous things?
2 BARUCH 55:8
And if you have heard the names of the tov and evil things which will come at that time, and if you are grieved, what about when you will see what the Majesty will reveal, who will convince some and cause others to rejoice?
2 BARUCH 56
2 BARUCH 56:1
But now, since you have asked YAHWEH the Most High to reveal to you the explanation of the vision which you have seen,
2 BARUCH 56:2
I have been sent to say to you that YAHWEH the Mighty One has let you know the course of times, namely those which have passed and those which in HIS world will come to pass, from the beginning of HIS creation until the end, (the times) which are known by deceit and by Truth.
2 BARUCH 56:3
For as you saw a great cloud which came up from the sea and went and covered the earth; this is the length of the world which YAHWEH the Mighty One has created when HE took counsel in order to create the world.
2 BARUCH 56:4
And it happened when the word had gone out from HIM, that the length of the world was standing as something small, and it was established in accordance with the abundance of the intelligence of HIM who let it go forth.
37

2 BARUCH 56:5
And as you first saw the black waters on the top of the cloud which first came down upon the earth; this is the transgression which Adam, the first man, committed.
2 BARUCH 56:6
For when he transgressed, untimely death came into being, mourning was mentioned, affliction was prepared, illness was created, labor accomplished, pride began to come into existence, the realm of death began to ask to be renewed with blood, the conception of children came about, the passion of the parents was produced, the loftiness of men was humiliated, and goodness vanished.
2 BARUCH 56:7
What could, therefore, have been blacker and darker than these things?
2 BARUCH 56:8
This is the beginning of the black waters which you have seen.
2 BARUCH 56:9
And from these black waters again black were born, and very dark darkness originated.
2 BARUCH 56:10
For he who was a danger to himself was also a danger to the malakim.
2 BARUCH 56:11
For they possessed freedom in that time in which they were created.
2 BARUCH 56:12
And some of them came down and mingled themselves with women.
2 BARUCH 56:13
At that time they who acted like this were tormented in chains.
2 BARUCH 56:14
But the rest of the multitude of malakim, who have no number, restrained themselves.
2 BARUCH 56:15
And those living on earth perished together through the waters of the flood.
2 BARUCH 56:16
Those are the first black waters.
2 BARUCH 57
2 BARUCH 57:1
And after these you saw the bright waters; that is the fountain of Abraham and his generation, and the coming of his son, and the son of his son, and of those who are like them.
2 BARUCH 57:2
For at that time the unwritten Torah was in force among them, and the works of the commandments were accomplished at that time, and the belief in the coming judgment was brought about, and the hope of the world which will be renewed was built at that time, and the promise of the Life that will come later was planted.
2 BARUCH 57:3
Those are the bright waters which you have seen.
38

 2 BARUCH 58
2 BARUCH 58:1
And the third black waters you have seen; that is the mingling of all sins which the nations committed afterward, after the death of those righteous men, and the wickedness of the land of Egypt, in which they acted wickedly in the oppression with which they oppressed their sons.
2 BARUCH 58:2
But also these perished at the end.
2 BARUCH 59
2 BARUCH 59:1
And the fourth bright waters which you have seen; that is the coming of Mosheh, and of Aaron, and of Miriam, and of Joshua, the son of Nun, and of Caleb, and all those who are like these.
2 BARUCH 59:2
For at that time the lamp of the eternal Torah which exists forever and ever illuminated all those who sat in darkness. This (lamp) will announce to those who believe the promise of their reward and to those who deny the punishment of the fire which is kept for them.
2 BARUCH 59:3
But also the heaven will be shaken from its place at that time; that is, the heavens which are under the throne of YAHWEH the Mighty One were severely shaken when HE took Mosheh with HIM.
2 BARUCH 59:4
For HE showed him many warnings together with the ways of the Torah and the end of time, as also to you; and then further, also the likeness of Zion with its measurements which was to be made after the likeness of the present sanctuary.
2 BARUCH 59:5
But HE also showed him, at that time, the measures of fire, the depths of the abyss, the weight of the winds, the number of the raindrops,
2 BARUCH 59:6
the suppression of wrath, the abundance of long-suffering, the Truth of Judgment,
2 BARUCH 59:7
the root of wisdom, the richness of understanding, the fountain of knowledge,
2 BARUCH 59:8
the height of the air, the greatness of Kingdom Paradise, the end of the periods, the beginning of the day of judgment,
2 BARUCH 59:9
the number of offerings, the worlds which have not yet come,
2 BARUCH 59:10
the mouth of hell, the standing place of vengeance, the place of faith, the region of hope,
39

2 BARUCH 59:11
the picture of the coming punishment, the multitude of the malakim which cannot be counted, the powers of the flame, the splendor of lightnings, the voice of the thunders, the orders of the Chief malakim, the treasuries of the Light, the changes of the times, and the inquiries into the Torah.
2 BARUCH 59:12
These are the fourth bright waters you have seen.
2 BARUCH 60
2 BARUCH 60:1
And the fifth black waters which you have seen poured down; those are the works which the Amorites have done, and the invocations of their incantations which they wrought, and the wickedness of their mysteries, and the mingling of their pollutions.
2 BARUCH 60:2
But even Yisrael was polluted with sins in these days of the judges, although they saw many signs which were from HIM who created them.
2 BARUCH 61
2 BARUCH 61:1
And the sixth bright waters which you have seen; this is the time in which David and Solomon were born.
2 BARUCH 61:2
And at that time the building of Zion took place, and the dedication of the sanctuary, and the shedding of much blood of the nations which sinned at that time, and the many offerings which were offered at that time at the inauguration of the sanctuary.
2 BARUCH 61:3
And rest and shalom reigned at that time.
2 BARUCH 61:4
And wisdom was heard in the assembly, and the richness of understanding was magnified in the congregations.
2 BARUCH 61:5
And the Kodesh festivals were fulfilled in happiness and much joy.
2 BARUCH 61:6
And the judgment of the rulers was seen at that time without deceit, and the righteousness of the commandments of YAHWEH the Mighty One was accomplished in Truth.
2 BARUCH 61:7
And the land which then received mercy, since its inhabitants did not sin, was praised above all countries, and the city of Zion ruled over all countries and regions at that time.
2 BARUCH 61:8
These are those bright waters you have seen.
   2 BARUCH 62
40

2 BARUCH 62:1
And the seventh black waters you have seen; that is the perversion of the ideas of Jeroboam who planned to make two golden calves,
2 BARUCH 62:2
and all the iniquities accomplished by the kings who succeeded him,
2 BARUCH 62:3
and the curse of Jezebel, and the idolatry which Yisrael practiced at that time,
2 BARUCH 62:4
and the withholding of rain, and the famines of such a kind that the women ate the fruits of their womb,
2 BARUCH 62:5
and the time of their exile which befell the nine and a half tribes because they lived in many sins.
2 BARUCH 62:6
And Salmanassar, the king of the Assyrians, came and carried them away into captivity.
2 BARUCH 62:7
And concerning the nations much could be said: how they acted unrighteously and wickedly, and how they never proved themselves to be righteous.
2 BARUCH 62:8
These are those seventh black waters you have seen.
2 BARUCH 63
2 BARUCH 63:1
And the eighth bright waters you have seen; that is the righteousness and the integrity of Hezekiah, King of Yahudah, and the free unmerited favor and pardon which came upon him.
2 BARUCH 63:2
For at that time Sennacherib was moved to destroy, and his wrath roused him, and also the multitude of the nations which were with him in order to destroy;
2 BARUCH 63:3
when Hezekiah the king heard that which the Assyrian king devised, namely, to come and seize him and destroy his people; the two and a half tribes which were left -and that he also wanted to destroy Zion, then Hezekiah trusted upon his works and hoped upon his righteousnesses, and spoke with YAHWEH the Mighty One and said;
2 BARUCH 63:4
"Pay attention, behold, Sennacherib is ready to destroy us, and he will boast and be uplifted when he has destroyed Zion."
2 BARUCH 63:5
And YAHWEH the Mighty One heard him for Hezekiah was wise, and he paid attention to his prayers for he was righteous.
2 BARUCH 63:6
And YAHWEH the Mighty One then commanded Ramael, his malak who speaks with you.
41

2 BARUCH 63:7
And I went away and destroyed their multitude, of which the number of the chiefs alone was one hundred and eighty-five thousand, and each of them had an equal number.
2 BARUCH 63:8
And at that time I burned their bodies within, but I preserved their clothes and their arms on the outside so that still more of the marvelous works of YAHWEH the Mighty One might be seen, and so that HIS NAME might be mentioned throughout the entire earth.
2 BARUCH 63:9
Thus Zion was saved, and Yerusalem was delivered from its tribulations.
2 BARUCH 63:10
And all those who were in the kodesh land rejoiced, and the NAME of YAHWEH the Mighty One was praised so that it was spoken of.
2 BARUCH 63:11
These are those bright waters which you have seen.
2 BARUCH 64
2 BARUCH 64:1
And the ninth black waters you have seen; that is, the wickedness that existed in the days of Manasseh, the son of Hezekiah.
2 BARUCH 64:2
For he acted very wickedly, and killed the righteous, and perverted judgment, and shed innocent blood, and violently polluted married women, and overturned altars, and abolished their offerings, and drove away the kohenim lest they minister in the sanctuary.
2 BARUCH 64:3
And he made a statue with five faces: Four of them looked into the direction of the four winds, and the fifth was on the top of the statue so as to challenge the zeal of YAHWEH the Mighty One."
2 BARUCH 64:4
And then the wrath of YAHWEH the Mighty One went out so that Zion should be uprooted as has also happened in your days.
2 BARUCH 64:5
But also the judgment went out against the two and a half tribes so that they also should be carried away into captivity as you have now seen.
2 BARUCH 64:6
And the impiety of Manasseh increased to such a degree that the splendor of YAHWEH the Most High removed itself from the sanctuary.
2 BARUCH 64:7
Therefore, Manasseh was called the impious one in that time, and finally his habitation was in the fire.
42

2 BARUCH 64:8
For although YAHWEH the Most High had heard his prayer, in the end when he fell into the brazen horse and the brazen horse was melted, it became to him as a sign regarding the hour (which was to come).
2 BARUCH 64:9
For he had not lived perfectly since he was not worthy, but (the sign was given to him) that he might know henceforth by whom he should be punished at the end.
2 BARUCH 64:10
For HE who is able to benefit is also able to punish.
2 BARUCH 65
2 BARUCH 65:1
This Manasseh sinned and he thought in his time that YAHWEH the Mighty One would not call account for these things.
2 BARUCH 65:2
These are those ninth black waters you have seen.
2 BARUCH 66
2 BARUCH 66:1
And the tenth bright waters you have seen; that is the purity of the generation of YoshiYah, the king of Yahudah, who was the only one in his time who subjected himself to YAHWEH the Mighty One with his whole heart and his whole soul.
2 BARUCH 66:2
He purified the country from the idols, sanctified all the vessels which were polluted, restored the offerings to the altar, raised the horn of the Kodesh, exalted the righteous, and honored all those who were wise with understanding. He brought the kohenim back to their ministry, and destroyed and removed the magicians, enchanters, and diviners from the land.
2 BARUCH 66:3
And he not only killed the impious who were living, but also the bones were taken from the graves of the dead and burned with fire.
2 BARUCH 66:4
And he established the Festivals and the Shabbats with their kodesh practices, and he burned the polluted with fire, and as for the lying prophets who deceived the people, also these he burned with fire. He cast the people who obeyed them, as long as they lived, into the Kidron valley, and heaped stones upon them.
2 BARUCH 66:5
And he was zealous with the zeal of YAHWEH the Mighty One with his whole soul, and he alone was strong in the Torah at that time so that he left no one un-circumcised or anyone who acted wickedly in the whole country all the days of his life.
2 BARUCH 66:6
He, then, is one who shall receive reward forever and ever and be honored with YAHWEH the Mighty One more than many in the last time.
43

2 BARUCH 66:7
For on his account and on account of those who are like him, the precious splendors have been created and prepared which were spoken to you earlier.
2 BARUCH 66:8
These are those bright waters which you have seen.
2 BARUCH 67
2 BARUCH 67:1
And the eleventh black waters you have seen; that is the disaster which has befallen Zion now.
2 BARUCH 67:2
Do you think that there is no mourning among the malakim before YAHWEH the Mighty One, that Zion is delivered up in this way? Behold, the nations rejoice in their hearts, and the multitudes are before their idols and say, ..She who has trodden others down for such a long time has been trodden down; and she who has subjugated has been subjugated."
2 BARUCH 67:3
Do you think that YAHWEH the Most High rejoices in these things or that HIS NAME has been magnified?
2 BARUCH 67:4
But how will it be with HIS righteous judgment?
2 BARUCH 67:5
But after these things those scattered among the nations will be taken hold of by tribulations and live in shame in every place.
2 BARUCH 67:6
For so far as Zion has been delivered up and Yerusalem laid waste, the idols in the cities of the nations are happy and the flavor of the smoke of the incense of the righteousness of the Torah has been extinguished everywhere in the region of Zion; behold, the smoke of the impiety is there.
2 BARUCH 67:7
But the king of Babylon will arise, the one who now has destroyed Zion, and he will boast over the people and speak haughtily in his heart before YAHWEH the Most High.
2 BARUCH 67:8
And he too will fall finally.
2 BARUCH 67:9
These are those black waters.
2 BARUCH 68
2 BARUCH 68:1
And the twelfth bright waters which you have seen; this is the word.
2 BARUCH 68:2
For there will come a time after these things, and your people will fall into such a distress so that they are all together in danger of perishing.
44

2 BARUCH 68:3
They, however, will be saved, and their enemies will fall before them.
2 BARUCH 68:4
And to them will fall much joy one day.
2 BARUCH 68:5
And at that time, after a short time, Zion will be rebuilt again, and the offerings will be restored, and the kohenim will again return to their ministry. And the nations will again come to honor it.
2 BARUCH 68:6
But not as fully as before.
2 BARUCH 68:7
But it will happen after these things that there will be a fall of many nations.
2 BARUCH 68:8
These are the bright waters you have seen.
2 BARUCH 69
2 BARUCH 69:1
With regard to the last waters you have seen which are blacker than all those preceding which came after the twelfth, those which were brought together; they apply to the whole world.
2 BARUCH 69:2
For YAHWEH the Most High made a division at the beginning for only HE knows what will happen in the future.
2 BARUCH 69:3
For with regard to the evils of the coming impieties which occurred before HIM, he saw six kinds.
2 BARUCH 69:4
And of the moraly right works of the righteous which would be accomplished before HIM, he foresaw six kinds, with the exclusion of that which HE should accomplish HIMSELF at the end of the world.
2 BARUCH 69:5
These are, therefore, not black waters with black, nor bright with bright. For that is the end.
2 BARUCH 70
2 BARUCH 70:1
Therefore, hear the exposition of the last black waters which will come after the black waters. This is the Word.
45

2 BARUCH 70:2
Behold, the days are coming and it will happen when the time of the world has ripened and the harvest of the seed of the evil ones and the tov ones has come that YAHWEH the Mighty One will cause to come over the earth and its inhabitants and its rulers confusion of the ruach and amazement of the heart. And they will hate one another and provoke one another to fight.
2 BARUCH 70:3
And the despised will rule over the honorable, and the unworthy will raise themselves over the illustrious.
2 BARUCH 70:4
And many will be delivered to the few, those who were nothing will rule over the strong, the poor will be greater in number than the rich, and the impious will exalt themselves over the brave.
2 BARUCH 70:5
The wise will be silent, and the foolish will speak. And the thought of men will not be realized then, nor the counsel of the strong, and the hope of those who hope will not be realized.
2 BARUCH 70:6
Then it will happen when those things occur which have been said before will come to pass, that confusion will fall upon all men. And some of them will fall in war, and others will perish in tribulations, and again others of them will be troubled by their own.
2 BARUCH 70:7
YAHWEH the Most High will then give a sign to those nations which HE has prepared before, and they will come and wage war with the rulers who will then remain.
2 BARUCH 70:8
And it will happen that everyone who saves himself from the war will die in an earthquake, and he who saves himself from the earthquake will be burned by fire, and he who saves himself from the fire will perish by famine.
2 BARUCH 70:9
And it will happen that everyone who will deliver himself and escape from all things which have been said before; both those who have won and those who have been overcome; that all will be delivered into the hands of MY Servant, the Anointed One.
2 BARUCH 70:10
For the whole earth will devour its inhabitants.
2 BARUCH 71
2 BARUCH 71:1
And the kodesh land will have mercy on its own and will protect its inhabitants at that time.
2 BARUCH 71:2
This is the vision which you have seen, and this is its explanation. For I have come to tell you these things since your prayer has been heard by YAHWEH the Most High.
  2 BARUCH 72
46

2 BARUCH 72:1
Now, hear also about the bright waters which come at the end after these black ones. This is the Word.
2 BARUCH 72:2
After the signs have come of which I have spoken to you before, when the nations are moved and the time of MY Anointed One comes, He will call all nations, and some of them He will spare, and others He will kill.
2 BARUCH 72:3
These things will befall the nations which will be spared by Him.
2 BARUCH 72:4
Every nation which has not known Yisrael and which has not trodden down the seed of Yacob will live.
2 BARUCH 72:5
And this is because some from all the nations have been subjected to your people.
2 BARUCH 72:6
All those, now, who have ruled over you or have known you, will be delivered up to the sword.
2 BARUCH 73
2 BARUCH 73:1
And it will happen that after He has brought down everything which is in the world, and has sat down in eternal shalom on the throne of the Kingdom, and then joy will be revealed and rest will appear.
2 BARUCH 73:2
And then health will descend in dew, and illness will vanish, and fear and tribulation and lamentation will pass away from among men, and joy will encompass the earth.
2 BARUCH 73:3
And nobody will again die untimely, nor will any adversity take place suddenly.
2 BARUCH 73:4
Unjust judgment, condemnations, contentions, revenges, blood, passions, zeal, hate, and all such things will go into condemnation since they will be uprooted.
2 BARUCH 73:5
For these are the things that have filled this earth with evils, and because of them life of men came in yet greater confusion.
2 BARUCH 73:6
And the wild beasts will come from the wood and serve men, and the asps and dragons will come out of their holes to subject themselves to a child.
2 BARUCH 73:7
And women will no longer have pain when they bear, nor will they be tormented when they yield the fruits of their womb.
  2 BARUCH 74
47

2 BARUCH 74:1
And it will happen in those days that the reapers will not become tired, and the farmers will not wear themselves out, because the products of themselves will shoot out speedily, during the time that they work on them in full tranquility.
2 BARUCH 74:2
For that time is the end of that which is corruptible and the beginning of that which is incorruptible.
2 BARUCH 74:3
Therefore, the things which were said before will happen in it. Therefore, it is far away from the evil things and near to those which do not die.
2 BARUCH 74:4
Those are the last bright waters which have come after the last dark waters.
2 BARUCH 75
2 BARUCH 75:1
And I answered and said: Who can equal YOUR tov, O YAHWEH? for it is incomprehensible.
2 BARUCH 75:2
Or who can fathom YOUR free unmerited favor and pardon which is without end?
2 BARUCH 75:3
Or who can understand YOUR intelligence?
2 BARUCH 75:4
Or who can narrate the thoughts of YOUR Ruach?
2 BARUCH 75:5
Or who of those born can hope to arrive at these things, apart from those to whom YOU are merciful and kind?
2 BARUCH 75:6
For if YOU were not merciful to men, those who are under YOUR right hand, they were not able to come to them, apart from those who are named among the famous number ."
2 BARUCH 75:7
But we who exist, when we know why we have come, and then subject ourselves to YOU who brought us out of Egypt, we shall come again and remember those things which have passed away, and rejoice with regard to the things which have been.
2 BARUCH 75:8
But if we do not know now why we have come, and do not recognize the sovereignty of YOU who brought us up from Egypt, we will come again and ask for that which has now occurred, and shall be severely grieved because of that which has happened.
  2 BARUCH 76
48

2 BARUCH 76:1
And he answered and said to me: Since the revelation of this vision has been explained to you as you prayed for, hear the Word of YAHWEH the Most High that you know that which will happen to you after these things.
2 BARUCH 76:2
For you will surely depart from this world, nevertheless not to death but to be kept unto (the end) of times.
2 BARUCH 76:3
Therefore, go up to the top of this mountain, and all countries of this earth will pass before you, as well as the likeness of the inhabited world, and the top of the mountains, and the depths of the valleys, and the depths of the seas, and the number of rivers, so that you may see that which you leave and where you go.
2 BARUCH 76:4
This will happen after forty days.
2 BARUCH 76:5
Go, therefore, now during these days and instruct the people as much as you can so that they may learn lest they die in the last times, but may learn so that they live in the last times.
2 BARUCH 77
Baruch speaks to the people
2 BARUCH 77:1
And I, Baruch, went away from there and came to the people, and assembled them from the greatest to the smallest and said to them:
2 BARUCH 77:2
Hear, O children of Yisrael, behold how many are left from the twelve tribes of Yisrael.
2 BARUCH 77:3
To you and to your fathers YAHWEH gave the Torah above all nations.
2 BARUCH 77:4
And because your brothers have transgressed the commandments of YAHWEH the Most High, HE brought vengeance upon you and upon them and did not spare the ancestors, but HE also gave the descendants into captivity and did not leave a remnant of them.
2 BARUCH 77:5
And, behold, you are here, with me.
2 BARUCH 77:6
If, therefore, you will make straight your ways, you will not go away as your brothers went away, but they will come to you.
2 BARUCH 77:7
For HE is merciful whom you honor, and kind in whom you hope, and True so that HE will do tov to you and not evil.
2 BARUCH 77:8
Have you not seen what has befallen Zion?
49

2 BARUCH 77:9
Or do you think that the place has sinned and that it has been destroyed for this reason, or that the country has done some crime and that it is delivered up for that reason?
2 BARUCH 77:10
And do you not know that because of you who sinned the one who did not sin was destroyed, and that because of those who acted unrighteously, the one who has not gone astray has been delivered up to the enemies?
The people invite Baruch to write a letter
50

2 BARUCH 77:11
And the whole people answered and they said to me: Everything which we can remember of the excellent things which YAHWEH the Mighty One has done to us we shall remember, and that which we do not remember HE knows in HIS free unmerited favor and pardon.
2 BARUCH 77:12
But do this for us, YOUR people: Write also to our brothers in Babylon a letter of doctrine and a roll of hope so that you might strengthen them also before you go away from us.
2 BARUCH 77:13
For the shepherds of Yisrael have perished, and the Lamps which gave Light are extinguished, and the fountains from which we used to drink have withheld their streams.
2 BARUCH 77:14
Now we have been left in the darkness and in the thick forest and in the aridness of the desert.
2 BARUCH 77:15
And I answered and said to them: Shepherds and lamps and fountains came from the Torah and when we go away, the Torah will abide.
2 BARUCH 77:16
If you, therefore, look upon the Torah and are intent upon wisdom, then the lamp will not be wanting and the shepherd will not give way and the fountain will not dry up.
2 BARUCH 77:17
Nevertheless, I shall also write to your brothers in Babylon as you have said to me, and I shall send it by means of men. Also I shall write to the nine and a half tribes, and send it by means of a bird.
2 BARUCH 77:18
And it happened on the twenty-first day of the ninth month that I, Baruch, came and sat down under the oak in the shadow of the branches, and nobody was with me; I was alone.
2 BARUCH 77:19
And I wrote two letters. One I sent by means of an eagle to the nine and a half tribes, and the other I sent by means of three men to those who were in Babylon.
2 BARUCH 77:20
And I called an eagle and said to him these words:
2 BARUCH 77:21
You have been created by YAHWEH the Most High that you should be higher than any other bird.
2 BARUCH 77:22
But now go and do not stay in any place, do not go into a nest, do not sit on any tree until you have flown over the breadth of the many waters of the river Euphrates and have come to the people that live there and cast down to them this letter.
51

2 BARUCH 77:23
Remember that Noah at the time of the flood received the fruit of the olive tree from a dove when he sent it away from the ark.
2 BARUCH 77:24
And also the ravens served EliYah when they brought food to him as they were commanded.
2 BARUCH 77:25
Also Solomon, in the time of his kingship, commanded a bird where he wanted to send a letter and in whatever he was in need of and it obeyed him as he commanded it.
2 BARUCH 77:26
And do not be reluctant and do not deviate to the right nor to the left, but fly and go straight away that you may preserve the command of YAHWEH the Mighty One as I said to you.
2 BARUCH 78
The letter to the nine and a half tribes
2 BARUCH 78:1
The letter of Baruch, the son of Neriah which he wrote to the nine and a half tribes. These are the words of the letter which Baruch, the son of Neriah' sent to the nine and a half tribes which were across the rivers in which were written the following things:
2 BARUCH 78:2
Thus speaks Baruch, the son of Neriah, to the brothers who were carried away in captivity:
2 BARUCH 78:3
Free unmerited favor and pardon and shalom be with you. I remember, my brothers, the love of HIM who created me, who loved us from the beginning and who never hated us but, on the contrary, chastised us.
2 BARUCH 78:4
And truly I know: Are we not all, the twelve tribes, bound by one captivity as we also descend from one father?
2 BARUCH 78:5
Therefore, I have been the more diligent to leave you the words of this letter before I die so that you may be comforted regarding the evils which have befallen you, and you may also be grieved with regard to the evils which have befallen your brothers, and then further, so that you may consider the judgment of HIM who decreed it against you to be righteous, namely, that you should be carried away into captivity, for what you have suffered is smaller than what you have done, in order that you may be found worthy of your fathers in the last times.
2 BARUCH 78:6
Therefore, if you think about the things you have suffered now for your excellence so that you may not be condemned at the end and be tormented, you shall receive hope which lasts forever and ever, particularly if you remove from your hearts the idol error for which you went away from here.
52

2 BARUCH 78:7
For if you do these things in this way, HE shall continually remember you. HE is the one who always promised on our behalf to those who are more excellent than we that HE will not forever forget or forsake our offspring, but with much mercy assemble all those again who were dispersed."
2 BARUCH 79
2 BARUCH 79:1
Therefore, my brothers, learn first what befell Zion, namely, that Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, came up against us.
2 BARUCH 79:2
For we had sinned against YAHWEH who created us, and had not observed the commandments which HE ordered us.
2 BARUCH 79:3
And yet HE has not chastised us as we deserved.
2 BARUCH 79:4
For what befell you, we suffered even more, for it befell us also.
2 BARUCH 80
2 BARUCH 80:1
And now, my brothers," when the enemies had surrounded the city, malakim were sent from YAHWEH the Most High. And they demolished the fortification of the strong wall, and HE destroyed their solid iron comers which could not be loosened.
2 BARUCH 80:2
Nevertheless, they hid the Kodesh vessels lest they be polluted by the enemies.
2 BARUCH 80:3
And when they had done these things, they left the demolished wall, the looted house, the burned Great Tabernacle, and the people who were overcome to the enemies, for they were delivered up lest the enemies should boast and say, "We have overcome to such an extent that we have even destroyed the house of YAHWEH the Most High."
2 BARUCH 80:4
They have also bound your brothers and carried them away to Babylon and have caused them to live there.
2 BARUCH 80:5
And we have been left here with very few.
2 BARUCH 80:6
That is the affliction about which I write to you.
2 BARUCH 80:7
For truly I know that the inhabitants of Zion were a comfort to you. As long as you knew that they were happy, this was more important than the affliction you endured being separated from them.
   2 BARUCH 81
53

2 BARUCH 81:1
But also hear the word of consolation.
2 BARUCH 81:2
For I mourned with regard to Zion and asked free unmerited favor and pardon from YAHWEH the Most High and said,
2 BARUCH 81:3
"Will these things exist for us until the end?
2 BARUCH 81:4
And will these evils befall us always?" And YAHWEH the Mighty One did according to the multitude of HIS free unmerited favor and pardon, and YAHWEH the Most High according to the magnitude of HIS mercy, and HE revealed to me a Word that I might be comforted, and showed me visions that I might not be again sorrowful, and made known to me the mysteries of the times, and showed me the coming of the periods.
2 BARUCH 82
2 BARUCH 82:1
My brothers, therefore I have written to you that you may find consolation with regard to the multitude of tribulations."
2 BARUCH 82:2
But you ought to know that our Creator will surely avenge us on all our brothers according to everything which they have done against us and among us; in particular that the end which YAHWEH the Most High prepared is near, and that HIS free unmerited favor and pardon is coming, and that the fulfillment of HIS judgment is not far.
2 BARUCH 82:3
For now we seed the multitude of the happiness of the nations although they have acted wickedly; but they are like a vapor.
2 BARUCH 82:4
And we behold the multitude of their power while they act impiously; but they will be made like a drop.
2 BARUCH 82:5
And we see the strength of their power while they resist YAHWEH the Mighty One every hour; but they will be reckoned like spittle.
2 BARUCH 82:6
And we will ponder about the splendor of their majesty while they do not keep the statutes of YAHWEH the Most High; but as smoke they will pass away.
2 BARUCH 82:7
And we think about the beauty of their splendor while they go down in impurities; but like grass which is withering, they will fade away.
2 BARUCH 82:8
And we ponder about the strength of their cruelty while they themselves do not think about the end; but they will be broken like a passing wave.
54

2 BARUCH 82:9
And we notice the pride of their power while they deny the tov of YAHWEH by whom it was given to them; but as a passing cloud they will vanish.
2 BARUCH 83
2 BARUCH 83:1
For YAHWEH the Most High will surely hasten HIS times, and HE will certainly cause HIS periods to arrive.
2 BARUCH 83:2
And HE will surely judge those who are in HIS world, and will truly inquire into everything with regard to all their works which were sins.
2 BARUCH 83:3
HE will certainly investigate the secret thoughts and everything which is lying in the inner chambers of all their members which are in sin. And HE will make them manifest in the presence of everyone with blame.
2 BARUCH 83:4
Therefore, nothing of the present things should come into your heart, but they should, on the contrary, be expected, since that which was promised will come.
2 BARUCH 83:5
And we should not look upon the delights of the present nations, but let us think about that which has been promised to us regarding the end.
2 BARUCH 83:6
For the ends of the times and the periods will surely pass away and all which is in them together .
2 BARUCH 83:7
The end of the world will then show the great power of YAHWEH our Ruler since everything will come to judgment.
2 BARUCH 83:8
You should, therefore, prepare your hearts for that which you have believed before, lest you should be excluded from both worlds, namely, that you were carried away into captivity here and tormented there.
2 BARUCH 83:9
For that which exists now or that which has passed away or that which will come, in all of that, neither the evil in it is fully evil, nor the tov is even fully tov.
2 BARUCH 83:10
For all sorts of health which exist now changes into illnesses.
2 BARUCH 83:11
And every might which exists now changes into weakness, and every power that exists now changes into miseries, and every youthful energy changes into old age and consummation.
2 BARUCH 83:12
And every beauty of elegances which exists now changes into withering and ugliness.
55

2 BARUCH 83:13
And every infantile pride which exists now changes into lowliness and shame. And every boast of haughtiness which exists now changes into the shame of silence.
2 BARUCH 83:14
And every delight and all splendor which exists now changes into ruin of silence.
2 BARUCH 83:15
And every joy and every delight which exist now change into rejection and ruin.
2 BARUCH 83:16
And every clamor of pride changes into silent dust.
2 BARUCH 83:17
And every possession of richness which exists now changes into the realm of death alone.
2 BARUCH 83:18
And every seizing desire which exists now changes into involuntary death, and every desire of lust! changes into the judgment of punishment.
2 BARUCH 83:19
And every capability of deceit which exists now changes into refutation by truth.
2 BARUCH 83:20
And every sweetness of ointments which exists now changes into judgment and condemnation.
2 BARUCH 83:21
And every friendship changes into silent defamations.
2 BARUCH 83:22
Since all these things happened now, do you think that they will not be avenged?
2 BARUCH 83:23
But the end of everything will come to Light.
2 BARUCH 84
2 BARUCH 84:1
Now, I gave you knowledge, while I still live. For I have said that you should particularly learn my mighty commandments which HE has instructed you. And I shall set before you some of the commandments of HIS judgment before I die.
2 BARUCH 84:2
Remember that once Mosheh called heaven and earth to witness against you and said, "If you trespass the Torah, you shall be dispersed. And if you shall keep it, you shall be planted.'
2 BARUCH 84:3
And also other things he said to you when you were in the desert as twelve tribes together .
2 BARUCH 84:4
And after his death you cast it away from you and, therefore, that which has been said before has come upon you.
56

2 BARUCH 84:5
And now, Mosheh spoke to you before it befell you and, behold, it has befallen you for you have forsaken the Torah.
2 BARUCH 84:6
Also I, behold, I say to you after you suffered that if you obey the things which I have said to you, you shall receive from YAHWEH the Mighty One everything which has been prepared and has been preserved for you.
2 BARUCH 84:7
Therefore, let this letter be a witness between me and you that you may remember the commandments of YAHWEH the Mighty One, and that it also may serve as my defense in the presence of HIM who has sent me.
2 BARUCH 84:8
And remember Zion and the Torah and the kodesh land and your brothers and the covenant and your fathers, and do not forget the Festivals and the Shabbats.
2 BARUCH 84:9
And give this letter and the doctrine of the Torah to your children after you as also your fathers handed down to you.
2 BARUCH 84:10
And ask always and pray seriously with your whole soul that YAHWEH the Mighty One may accept you in mercy and that HE may not reckon the multitude of your sinners, but remember the integrity of your fathers.
2 BARUCH 84:11
For if HE judges us not according to the multitude of HIS free unmerited favor and pardon, woe to all us who are born.!
2 BARUCH 85
2 BARUCH 85:1
Further, know that our fathers in former times and former generations had helpers, righteous prophets and kodesh men."
2 BARUCH 85:2
But we were also in our country, and they helped us when we sinned, and they intervened for us with HIM who has created us since they trusted in their works. And YAHWEH the Mighty One heard them and purged us from our sins.
2 BARUCH 85:3
But now, the righteous have been assembled, and the prophets are sleeping. Also we have left our land, and Zion has been taken away from us, and we have nothing now apart from YAHWEH the Mighty One and HIS Torah.
2 BARUCH 85:4
Therefore, if we direct and dispose our hearts, we shall receive everything which we lost again by many times.
2 BARUCH 85:5
For that which we lost was subjected to corruption, and that which we receive will not be corruptible.
57

2 BARUCH 85:6
We also have written to our brothers in Babylon so that I may attest to them these things also.
2 BARUCH 85:7
And these things which I have said earlier should be before your eyes always, since we are still in the ruach of the power of our liberty.
2 BARUCH 85:8
And further, YAHWEH the Most High is also long-suffering to us here and has shown to us that which comes and has not concealed from us what will happen at the end.
2 BARUCH 85:9
Therefore, before HIS judgment exacts HIS own and Truth of that which is its due, let us prepare ourselves that we may possess and not be possessed, and that we may hope and not be put to shame, and that we may rest with our fathers and not be punished with those who hate us.
2 BARUCH 85:10
For the youth of this world has passed away, and the power of creation is already exhausted, and the coming of the times is very near and has passed by. And the pitcher is near the well, and the ship to the harbor, and the journey to the city, and life to its end.
2 BARUCH 85:11
Further, prepare yourselves so that, when you sail and ascend from the ship, you may have rest and not be condemned when you have gone away.
2 BARUCH 85:12
For behold, YAHWEH the Most High will cause all these things to come. There will not be an opportunity to repent anymore, nor a limit to the times, nor a duration of the periods, nor a change to rest," nor an opportunity to prayer, nor sending up petition, nor giving knowledge, nor giving love, nor opportunity of repentance, nor supplicating for offenses, nor prayers of the fathers, nor intercessions of the prophets, nor help of the righteous.
2 BARUCH 85:13
There is the proclamation of judgment to corruption,' regarding the way! to the fire and the path that leads to the glowing coals."
2 BARUCH 85:14
Therefore, there is one Torah by One, one world and an end for all those who exist.
2 BARUCH 85:15
Then HE will make alive those whom HE has found, and HE will purge them from sins, and at the same time HE will destroy those who are polluted with sins.
2 BARUCH 86
2 BARUCH 86:1
When you, therefore, receive the letter,' read it carefully in your assemblies. And think about it, in particular, however, on the days of your fasts. And remember me by means of this letter in the same way as I remember you by means of this, and always.
58

 2 BARUCH 87
2 BARUCH 86:1
And" it happened when I had finished all the words of this letter and had written it carefully until the end, I folded it, sealed it cautiously, and bound it to the neck of the eagle. And I let it go and sent it away.
The end of the letter of Baruch, the son of Neriah.
Shalom
Blessed are they that do the word of YAHWEH.
YAHWEH's Sword
 59
